---
title: religioid
author: thomas jurczyk
layout: project
exclude: true
category: projects
---

<h2
id="a-quantitative-analysis-of-the-dissemination-of-religious-notions-in-contemporary-english-texts">A
Quantitative Analysis of the Dissemination of Religious Notions in
Contemporary English Texts (May 23, 2022)</h2>
<h3 id="aim-of-this-research-project">Aim of this Research Project</h3>
<p>The project has set itself the task of quantitatively examining
central religious concepts such as sacred, ritual, purity, and religion
in terms of their prevalence, use, and meaning in various social fields
such as politics and art. From a theoretical perspective, the project’s
focus lies on (de)sacralization processes <span class="citation"
data-cites="krech_soziologie_2018">(see <a
href="#ref-krech_soziologie_2018" role="doc-biblioref">Krech
2018</a>)</span> and the concept of the “religioid” coined by Simmel
<span class="citation" data-cites="tyrell_religioide_2018">(see <a
href="#ref-tyrell_religioide_2018" role="doc-biblioref">Tyrell
2018</a>)</span>.</p>
<p>Empirically, this project will build on the religious studies text
corpus ReligionML that includes documents from different social fields
and annotates them to enable data-driven research in the study of
religion (more details on ReligionML and the first annotation attempts
can be found on the <a
href="https://thomjur.github.io/home_page/projects/religionml.html">ReligionML
website</a>).</p>
<h3 id="theoretical-background">Theoretical Background</h3>
<p>The theoretical background of this project is, on the one hand, the
concept of the “religioid” coined by Georg Simmel, which describes the
emergence of religious semantics and of religion as a whole from
(non-religious) social processes:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Als Ausgangspunkt dient die empirische Herleitung von Religion aus
sozialen Vorgängen mittels des Differenzierungsparadigmas und der daraus
resultierenden Unterscheidung von Religion als autonomer
Vorstellungswelt und „Religioidem“ […], das bereits in
Vergesellschaftungsprozessen vorzufinden ist. [<span class="citation"
data-cites="krech_soziologie_2018">Krech (<a
href="#ref-krech_soziologie_2018" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a>)</span>,
337]<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></p>
</blockquote>
<p>Complementing the concept of the religioid, the project also draws on
the process of (de)sacralization, which can be seen as an extension of
the concept of secularization. In a linguistic context, secularization
is commonly understood as the deconstruction of the religious origin of
concepts and their interpretation in a non-religious context <span
class="citation" data-cites="schlette_heilige_2009">(see <a
href="#ref-schlette_heilige_2009" role="doc-biblioref">Schlette
2009</a>)</span>. The concept of descralization, in contrast to
sacralization, is understood as part of a broader phenomenon oscillating
between the poles of increasing (sacralization) and decreasing
(desacralization) religious interpretations <span class="citation"
data-cites="krech_soziologie_2018">(<a href="#ref-krech_soziologie_2018"
role="doc-biblioref">Krech 2018, 445</a>)</span>. In this context,
sacralization is understood as the process of a religious interpretation
of “vormals religiös insignifikante Entität[en]” <span class="citation"
data-cites="krech_soziologie_2018">(<a href="#ref-krech_soziologie_2018"
role="doc-biblioref">Krech 2018, 443</a>)</span>,<a href="#fn2"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref2" role="doc-noteref"><sup>2</sup></a>
which is not only undertaken by religious actors (e.g. religious
institutions) but can also be initiated by non-religious
participants:</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Unter Sakralisierung ist in der Religionsforschung ganz allgemein zu
verstehen, dass sich die kollektive Verständigung über das Heilige vom
religiösen in den nicht-religiösen Bereich ausweitet oder verlagert.
[<span class="citation"
data-cites="schlette_sakralisierung_2018">Schlette and Krech (<a
href="#ref-schlette_sakralisierung_2018"
role="doc-biblioref">2018</a>)</span>, 437]<a href="#fn3"
class="footnote-ref" id="fnref3" role="doc-noteref"><sup>3</sup></a></p>
</blockquote>
<p>The process of (de)sacralization can shift the meaning of concepts
from the religious to the non-religious realm, but it can also take the
opposite path by linking formerly non-religious phenomena to the realm
of religion <span class="citation" data-cites="bellah_civil_1967">(see
the example of civil religion in <a href="#ref-bellah_civil_1967"
role="doc-biblioref">Bellah 1967</a>)</span>.</p>
<p>The project “A Quantitative Analysis of the Dissemination of
Religious Notions in Contemporary English Texts” will attempt to
quantitatively analyze these processes of religioid use cases of certain
terms as well as the process of (de)sacralization using texts from
various social fields. Potential social fields that could be examined in
this context are found, among others, in the section “Religion im
gesellschaftlichen Kontext” in the <em>Handbuch Religionssoziologie</em>
<span class="citation" data-cites="pollack_handbuch_2018">(<a
href="#ref-pollack_handbuch_2018" role="doc-biblioref">Pollack et al.
2018, 657–859</a>)</span>. For several reasons (among others:
availability, copyright issues, relevance), the project is currently
limited to the three fields of politics, art, and media/internet.<a
href="#fn4" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref4"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>4</sup></a></p>
<h3 id="methodology">Methodology</h3>
<p>The methodology is based on the quantitative analysis of the textual
evidence collected in the ReligionML Corpus, consisting of sentences and
short documents of diverse provenance (text snippets, tweets, etc.). The analysis will be performed by applying machine
learning algorithms <span class="citation"
data-cites="geron_handson_2019">(in particular from the field of
unsupervised learning, see <a href="#ref-geron_handson_2019"
role="doc-biblioref">Géron 2019</a>)</span> on the annotated documents
of the ReligionML Corpus. In addition, established methods from
the field of corpus linguistics will be applied to achieve a better
understanding of the use and meaning of the terms under investigation.
These include methods such as keyword analysis, collocation analysis,
and word frequency lists <span class="citation"
data-cites="brezina_statistics_2018b">(<a
href="#ref-brezina_statistics_2018b" role="doc-biblioref">Brezina
2018</a>)</span>.</p>
<p>The quantitative methods will be expanded to include a qualitative
level of analysis focusing on selected textual examples drawn from the
quantitative analysis. The <em>mixed methods</em> approach used here
builds on a procedure I developed in my dissertation <span
class="citation" data-cites="jurczyk_notion_2022a">(<a
href="#ref-jurczyk_notion_2022a" role="doc-biblioref">Jurczyk
2022</a>)</span> that will hopefully be extended during this
project.</p>
<p>An example in this context is the analysis of (English) terms such as
"sacred" or "holy" in documents of different provenance and genres
(Twitter, newspaper articles, forums, art, politics, etc.), which are
collected and annotated in the ReligionML Corpus and analyzed and
discussed under the questions addressed in the theory section <span
class="citation" data-cites="jurczyk_notion_2022a">(I took a first step
in this direction in my dissertation, see <a
href="#ref-jurczyk_notion_2022a" role="doc-biblioref">Jurczyk
2022</a>)</span>.</p>
<h3 id="data">Data</h3>
<p>The data, consisting of individual sentences or short sections, will
be archived and processed in a structured manner in the ReligionML
Corpus. Central to both the investigations in the context of this
project and the ReligionML project as a whole are the annotations to be
made at the document and word level, the details of which are explained
on the <a
href="https://thomjur.github.io/home_page/projects/religionml.html">ReligionML
Corpus website</a>.</p>
<p>From a copyright and pragmatic<a href="#fn5" class="footnote-ref"
id="fnref5" role="doc-noteref"><sup>5</sup></a> point of view, already
digitized and freely available sources (Twitter, newspapers, digitized
books, Wikipedia, etc.) are to be included and supplemented with manual
and anonymized excerpts from other sources. From a copyright
perspective, it is advantageous that the analyses in this project are
based on short text excerpts (sentences and at most paragraphs, tweets)
without including the complete sources.</p>
<h2 class="unnumbered" id="bibliography">Bibliography</h2>
<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
role="doc-bibliography">
<div id="ref-bellah_civil_1967" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Bellah, Robert N. 1967. <span>“Civil Religion in America.”</span>
<em>Daedalus</em> 96 (1): 1–21.
</div>
<div id="ref-brezina_statistics_2018b" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Brezina, Vaclav. 2018. <em>Statistics in corpus linguistics: a practical
guide</em>. <a
href="https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/statistics-in-corpus-linguistics/4E530F86B328B2287681AD240796D2CF#fndtn-contents">https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/statistics-in-corpus-linguistics/4E530F86B328B2287681AD240796D2CF#fndtn-contents</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-geron_handson_2019" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Géron, Aurélien. 2019. <em>Hands-on Machine Learning with Scikit-Learn,
Keras, and TensorFlow: Concepts, Tools, and Techniques to Build
Intelligent Systems</em>. Second edition. O’Reilly.
</div>
<div id="ref-jurczyk_notion_2022a" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Jurczyk, Thomas. 2022. <em>The Notion of <span>“holy”</span> in Ancient
Armenian Texts from the Fifth Century CE: A Comparative Approach Using
Digital Tools and Methods</em>. Digital Humanities Research 5.
Bielefeld: transcript.
</div>
<div id="ref-krech_soziologie_2018" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Krech, Volkhard. 2018. <span>“Die ‚Soziologie der Religion` – neu
gelesen.”</span> In <em>Georg simmel und das leben in der
gegenwart</em>, edited by Rüdiger Lautmann and Hanns Wienold, 325–46.
Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-21427-2_18">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-21427-2_18</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-krech_religion_2018" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2018. <span>“Religion und Kunst.”</span> In <em>Handbuch
Religionssoziologie</em>, edited by Detlef Pollack, Volkhard Krech, Olaf
Müller, and Markus Hero, 783–807. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien
Wiesbaden. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-18924-6_32">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-18924-6_32</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-neumaier_religion_2016" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Neumaier, Anna. 2016. <span>“Religion@home? religionsbezogene
Online-Plattformen und ihre Nutzung eine Untersuchung zu neuen Formen
gegenwärtiger Religiosität.”</span> Würzburg: Ergon Verlag.
</div>
<div id="ref-neumaier_religion_2018" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
———. 2018. <span>“Religion, Öffentlichkeit, Medien.”</span> In
<em>Handbuch Religionssoziologie</em>, edited by Detlef Pollack,
Volkhard Krech, Olaf Müller, and Markus Hero, 833–59. Wiesbaden:
Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-18924-6_34">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-18924-6_34</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-pollack_handbuch_2018" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Pollack, Detlef, Volkhard Krech, Olaf Müller, and Markus Hero, eds.
2018. <em>Handbuch Religionssoziologie</em>. Veröffentlichungen der
Sektion Religionssoziologie der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Soziologie.
Wiesbaden [Heidelberg]: Springer VS. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-18924-6">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-18924-6</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-schlette_heilige_2009" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Schlette, Magnus. 2009. <span>“Das Heilige in der Moderne.”</span> In
<em>Religiöse Erfahrung in der Moderne. William James und die
Folgen</em>, by C. Thies, 109–32. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
</div>
<div id="ref-schlette_sakralisierung_2018" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Schlette, Magnus, and Volkhard Krech. 2018.
<span>“Sakralisierung.”</span> In <em>Handbuch Religionssoziologie</em>,
edited by Detlef Pollack, Volkhard Krech, Olaf Müller, and Markus Hero,
437–63. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-18924-6_17">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-18924-6_17</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-tyrell_religioide_2018" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Tyrell, Hartmann. 2018. <span>“Das Religioide und der Glaube.”</span> In
<em>Georg Simmel und das Leben in der Gegenwart</em>, edited by Rüdiger
Lautmann and Hanns Wienold, 347–62. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien
Wiesbaden. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-21427-2_19">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-658-21427-2_19</a>.
</div>
<div id="ref-willems_religion_2018" class="csl-entry"
role="doc-biblioentry">
Willems, Ulrich. 2018. <span>“Religion und Politik.”</span> In
<em>Handbuch Religionssoziologie</em>, edited by Detlef Pollack,
Volkhard Krech, Olaf Müller, and Markus Hero, 659–92. Wiesbaden:
Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden. <a
href="https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-18924-6_27">https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-531-18924-6_27</a>.
</div>
</div>
<section class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1" role="doc-endnote"><p>“The starting point is the empirical
derivation of religion from social processes by means of the
differentiation paradigm and the resulting distinction between religion
as an autonomous world of imagination and a ‘religioid’ [...], which is
already found in processes of socialization.”<a href="#fnref1"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn2" role="doc-endnote"><p>“formerly religiously insignificant
entity[ies].”<a href="#fnref2" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn3" role="doc-endnote"><p>“In religious studies, sacralization
is generally understood to mean that the collective understanding of the
sacred expands or shifts from the religious to the non-religious
realm.”<a href="#fnref3" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn4" role="doc-endnote"><p>For the relation between religion and
politics, see Willems <span class="citation"
data-cites="willems_religion_2018">(<a href="#ref-willems_religion_2018"
role="doc-biblioref">2018</a>)</span>. For the relation between religion
and art, see Krech <span class="citation"
data-cites="krech_religion_2018">(<a href="#ref-krech_religion_2018"
role="doc-biblioref">2018</a>)</span>. For the relation between religion
and media/online discourses, see Neumaier <span class="citation"
data-cites="neumaier_religion_2018 neumaier_religion_2016">(<a
href="#ref-neumaier_religion_2018" role="doc-biblioref">2018</a>, <a
href="#ref-neumaier_religion_2016"
role="doc-biblioref">2016</a>)</span>.<a href="#fnref4"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
<li id="fn5" role="doc-endnote"><p>The keyword here is automated
acquisition of data through web scraping.<a href="#fnref5"
class="footnote-back" role="doc-backlink">↩︎</a></p></li>
</ol>
</section>
